This document explains how to use the repository to retrieve the module
source, build modules and install them. There are two basic methods: we can
either build the modules from source and install them ourselves or replace
VMware provided source tarballs with patched ones and let it use its own
vmware-modconfig tool.


0. Quick guide for impatient
----------------------------

First method (build and install):

  wget https://github.com/mkubecek/vmware-host-modules/archive/workstation-14.1.1.tar.gz
  tar -xzf workstation-14.1.1.tar.gz
  cd vmware-host-modules-workstation-14.1.1
  make
  make install

Last command must be executed with root privileges (first four shouldn't).
Based on your VMware product, replace "14.1.1" with your installed version
and/or "workstation" with "player".

Second method (replace original tarballs):

  wget https://github.com/mkubecek/vmware-host-modules/archive/workstation-14.1.1.tar.gz
  tar -xzf workstation-14.1.1.tar.gz
  cd vmware-host-modules-workstation-14.1.1
  tar -cf vmmon.tar vmmon-only
  tar -cf vmnet.tar vmnet-only
  cp -v vmmon.tar vmnet.tar /usr/lib/vmware/modules/source/
  vmware-modconfig --console --install-all

In this case, last two commands require root privileges.


1a. Retrieve the source - with git
----------------------------------

Using git is preferrable as it allows an easy switch to sources for
different product/version or update for newer kernel version. Without git,
you can only download one particular source snapshot.

First, clone the repository from GitHub either using HTTPS

  git clone https://github.com/mkubecek/vmware-host-modules.git

or using SSH

  git clone git@github.com:mkubecek/vmware-host-modules.git

Using SSH is preferrable if you already have an account on GitHub, use
HTTPS if you don't.

Branch "master" cannot be used to build modules, it contains only common
files so that changes in them can be merged into all other branches easily.
To get actual sources, checkout a "real" branch, e.g.

  git checkout workstation-14.1.1

Branch name consists of "workstation" (for Workstation) or "player" (for
Player), a dash and version number ("14.1.1" here). Always use correct
product and version, the modules check if internal source version matches
installed product and refuse to load otherwise. Actually, in all recent
versions, "workstation" and "player" sources have been identical but there
is no guarantee it will always be the case.

To pull out updated branch (if there are new commits), run "git pull", to
switch to a new branch run "git fetch" and "git checkout ...".


1b. Retrieve the source - without git
-------------------------------------

GitHub allows to download a particular snapshot (branch or tag) directly
without git:

  wget https://github.com/mkubecek/vmware-host-modules/archive/workstation-14.1.1.tar.gz

where "workstation" and "14.1.1" have the same meaning as in section 1a.
Any other tool can be used to retrieve the URL, of course. It's also
possible to download directly from the web interface, switch to the branch
you are interested in, click the "Clone or download" button and then
"Download ZIP".

Unpack the downloaded archive

  tar -xzf workstation-14.1.1.tar.gz

or

  unzip vmware-host-modules-workstation-14.1.1.zip

depending on archive type. Then change to the resulting directory.


2a. Build and install modules - directly
----------------------------------------

To build modules against currently running kernel, just run "make" in top
level directory. It creates two module files vmmon-only/vmmon.ko and
vmnet-only/vmnet.ko (unstripped). To build against a different kernel, set
variable VM_UNAME, e.g.

  make VM_UNAME='4.14.15-5-default'

As name suggests, this variable should be set to what "uname -r" would show
when that kernel is booted (it's the same as name of the subdirectory under
/lib/modules with modules of that kernel).

To install built modules for currently running kernel, run "make install".
This command needs to be run as user with permissions to write into the
directory with kernel modules (under normal circumstances, this should be
only root). The VM_UNAME variable can be used to install for a different
kernel. Unless you know well what are you doing and why, the same value
should be always used for "make" and "make install". That's why makefile
checks if vermagic tag of the moudules match VM_UNAME (or current kernel if
VM_UNAME isn't set).

If DESTDIR is not set (or is empty), "make install" also runs depmod to
update module dependency cache.

Note that "make install" replaces existing module files but it does not
replace modules in running kernel if they are already loaded. Reloading the
modules can be enforced e.g. by

  /etc/init.d/vmware restart

All running VMs should be turned off before this.


2b. Build and install modules - replacing the original source tarballs
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Manual build and installation of host modules may be natural for developers
and power users but those who prefer to "just use" would appreciate if they
could rely on standard VMware tools. To this goal, we need to replace the
module source tarballs with patched versions.

In local checked out repository, the replacement tarballs can be created
with

  make tarballs

This command creates files vmmon.tar and vmnet.tar which can be used to
replace the original tarballs provided with the VMware product. Note that
this command creates the tarball from current HEAD (in git language), i.e.
they do not contain any uncommited local changes (e.g. files created by
test build).

When using a downloaded tarball, simply run

  tar -cf vmmon.tar vmmon-only
  tar -cf vmnet.tar vmnet-only

to create the tarballs. In this case, there is no protection against
unwanted local changes.

Whatever way you used to create the tarballs, replace the original ones
provided by VMware

  /usr/lib/vmware/modules/source/vmmon.tar
  /usr/lib/vmware/modules/source/vmnet.tar

by patched versions. It is highly recommended to backup the original
tarballs before replacing them.

Once patched tarballs are installed, you can rebuild the modules as usual:

  vmware-modconfig --console --install-all

or let the GUI run the command for you.

Replacing the original tarballs prevents having to rebuild and install the
modules manually with every new kernel version. However, once the VMware
product is upgraded or reinstalled, tarballs are replaced so that if the
new VMware version doesn't build/work with a recent kernel, you still need
to repeat the process. The same also holds if there is a new kernel which
requires updated version of the patches.


3. Final notes
--------------

Always make sure that you are using a branch matching the Workstation or
Player version you are running. VMware software may refuse to start if
module intended for different version is loaded. And unless you have
a reason not to, use current head of that branch; even if the module
builds, there may still be later fixes which may be important.

In some web forums, one can comments suggesting to rip out one patched file
and use it as replacement for the corresponding file with VMware tarballs.
Please don't do this - and if you do, don't complain if something doesn't
work. A commit fixing some problem is meant to be used as a whole; picking
just changes in one file can lead to rather unpredictable results. While
picking just one commit (or some of the commits) in a branch is perfectly
fine (you should still know what are you doing and why), picking just one
patched file rarely makes sense.
